---
label: Cat. no. 3
title: "*Cartonnier* with *Serre-papiers*, *Bout de Bureau* and Clock"
short_title: "*Cartonnier*"
type: entry
weight: 103
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 3
---

## Description

The *cartonnier* is composed of three parts. Above is a clock set with
four lacquered bronze figures. It rests on the upper surface of the
*serre-papiers*, but is not mechanically attached to it. The
*serre-papiers* was originally fitted with five leather fronted
cardboard filing boxes, called *cartons*, three above and two below. It
stands on short legs atop the *bout de bureau*. The sides of this
shallow rectangular cabinet are set with locking doors, and the lower
section of each canted front corner is scrolled and pierced.

{{< q-figure id="3-a" class="is-pulled-right" >}}

The splayed front of the clock is set with an elaborate arrangement of
leafy C and S-scrolls in gilt bronze that outline the profile of the
clock and surround the viewing hole. The latter are overlaid with shell
motifs and set at either side with short bunches of leaves and flowers.
Linked and overlapping leafy C-scrolls form the frame to the glass cover
of the face. Above, a gilt bronze cloth carrying one tassel is laid over
an elaborately gadrooned mount. On it are seated two boys; that on the
left holds up a single palm frond in his left hand and points to it with
his right **(fig. 3-a)**. The lounging boy to the right leans on his left
forearm and gazes up at the now missing palm tree (see Commentary
below). Both boys are clothed in black robes painted with flower heads
and open fans bound with ribbons. Their robes are lined with red.

On the left shoulder of the clock case, a Chinese woman sits on a large
C-scroll **(fig. 3-b)**. Her hands cross on a tambourine that rests on her
knee. Her hair is dressed in a bun from which one lock descends over her
right shoulder. Her long jacket and skirt are black and painted with
gold flowers, revealing a red lining. She also wears a cream colored
undershirt piped in red and gold. On the right sits a Chinese man (fig.
3-c). He holds a horn in his left hand and points to it with his right.
He is mustachioed and bald. His long fur-trimmed jacket and trousers are
black, painted in gold with branches of flowers. His undershirt is
black, piped in red and gold.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-b, 3-c" grid="2" >}}

The sides of the clock are set with further broadly designed C- and
S-scrolls, decorated with leaves, fluting, and shell motifs. The front
of the clock is painted with eleven simple flower heads in gold. The
sides are decorated with a rising leafy branch of camellia on the left,
and by a stem of camellia above a branch of bamboo on the right. The
plain un-veneered back of the clock is painted black. It is concave and
set with a hinged door that occupies most of the central area and is
shaped to follow the profile of that part of the case.

The top of the *serre-papiers* is framed with a gilt-bronze molding of
rosette-filled guilloche. It is set on its upper front and back corners
with mounts made in two sections **(fig 3-d)**. The lower consists of a
central flat cabochon surrounded by eight petals and leaves. These rise
and overlap the upper section, which takes the form of a leafy vine
carrying berries. The foot mount is pierced, with the opening surrounded
by concave gadroons clasped at either side by foliate scrolls **(fig.
3-e)**. Above rise two bands that follow the profile of the corner. They
are set below with acanthus scrolls and lined above with bands of flame
work set with cabochons. The bands are joined at the center by a
striated disk set with leafy buds above and below. The upper center of
the front of the *serre-papiers* is set with a pierced mount consisting
of foliate C- and S-scrolls, edged with flame motifs and supporting a
leafy flowering plant **(fig 3-f)**. The mounts at the sides consist of a
simple shaped frame surrounding an area of European lacquer. The upper
part of this frame is composed of foliate C-scrolls topped by a bat’s
wing **(fig. 3-g)**. Below this frame a further band of decoration runs
horizontally **(fig. 3-h)**. It is composed of C-scrolls centered by a
shell-like device below feathered wings which extend to either side. At
the lower edges of the sides of the *serre-papiers* asymmetrical mounts
consisting of two adorsed C-scrolls, that on the left topped by a curled
feather **(fig. 3-i)**. At their juncture is a curved cabochon surrounded by
leafy motifs. The frame of the open front of the *serre-papiers* is
outlined by a plain gilt-bronze molding, and the divisions between the
five compartments are similarly defined.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-d, 3-e, 3-f, 3-g, 3-h, 3-i" grid="2" >}}

The front of the *serre-papiers*, above the opening, shows flowering
plants bearing a few red leaves among the gold. A scene on the left side
of the *serre-papiers*, framed in gilt bronze, shows a rocky mound on
the lower left from which grows a flowering tree carrying red fruits
**(fig. 3-j)**. Bunches of leaves and ferns grow in the ground, and a bird
flies above. Above and below the framed area are arrangements of
flowering plants set with grasses and some red leaves. A bird flies
below. On the right side the panel is painted with a plum tree in
blossom rising from a rocky ground **(fig. 3-k)**. A bird perches on its
main branch. On the ground below is a small arrangement of leaves and
ferns. The upper portion of the right side of the *serre-papiers* is
painted with a sprig of flowering plum with some red petals. At the left
a bird flies. Below the frame are two branches of a pomegranate tree
bearing four fruits. Two have slit open to reveal red seeds. The
interiors of the compartments are painted black.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-j, 3-k" grid="2" >}}

{{< q-figure id="3-l" class="is-pulled-right" >}}

The upper edge of the *bout de bureau* is set with a frame of gilt
bronze guilloche studded with alternating cabochons and rosettes. The
upper canted corners are set with pierced mounts **(fig. 3-l)**. The main
part of each mount consists of two foliate straps separated by a flat
cabochon surrounded by a cartilaginous frame. An acanthus leaf and its
accompanying spike overlap the scrolled upper part of the mount. A
pendant of leaves and flowers hangs below. The base of the canted corner
is set with a gilt bronze bifurcated scroll that rises to form a large
acanthus leaf, set with a short spike and topped by a leafy bud (fig.
3-m).

The face of the *bout de bureau* is set with an elaborate frame of the
same design as that found surrounding the doors of the Museum’s corner
cupboards (Cat. no 5). The moldings to either side of the central mounts
of the upper and lower frame have been lengthened to give the frame the
needed greater width. Mounts of this model, halved vertically are found
framing the doors at the sides of the bureau. The inner vertical side of
the frame is formed by a plain molding. The keyhole is set between the
meandering floral vine and the simple curved molding. There are no
escutcheons. Above the short unmounted legs and the apron runs a broad
molding of conforming shape to the base and the projecting canted
corners. It is composed of strap work containing and supporting
*fleurons* and buds set on a diapered ground. The apron mount, a late
nineteenth century replacement, consists of an arrangement of flowers
and leafy stems held between extending leafy scrolls that follow the
lower profile of the piece **(fig. 3-n)**.

{{< q-figure id="3-n" >}}

The large panel on the front of the *bout de bureau* depicts, on the
right, two cranes and to the left of them a single branching stem of
azalea rising in front of a double branch of daisies **(figs. 3-o, 3-p)**.
The centers of the daisies, the azalea, and some of the leaves are
painted red. The ground is covered with smaller flowering plants and
grasses. In the upper left a bird flies and on the right is a large
dragonfly. The left side of the *bout be bureau* illustrates a rising
daisy stem carrying six flowers, two with red centers. Above fly two
butterflies. The right side shows a branch of wisteria with flowers,
leaves and tendrils. Some of the single flowers on the spurs are painted
red. Above fly two more butterflies. All the remaining surfaces of the
clock, *serre-papiers,* and *bout de bureau* are painted with black
European lacquer.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-o, 3-p" grid="2" >}}

## Marks

The clock: The dial is enameled ETIENNE LE NOIR A PARIS, and the
movement engraved Etienne Le Noir A Paris. The spring of the striking
train is inscribed Buzot 9BRE 1746, and that of the main train Richard
Mai 1752. The dial plate is inscribed on the front, Edmond de Rotchild
(*sic*), and on the back, Wilson / Dec 30 1839 / Jwb Oct 82. The dial is
signed in black on its reverse decla.1746. There are repair marks on the
front plate, M. Journe / Le 13 Nov 1971 / a Paris / F P JOURNE DEC 1976
/ a Paris / Le 23 juin 1777/B. The nineteenth century bell is inscribed
in ink Le[?] Dreves / [P]aris. Some of the gilt bronze mounts are
struck with the crowned C.[^1] The bottom of the clock is inscribed
R974.

*Serre-papiers*: The top center of the back is stamped B.V.R.B **(fig.
3-q)**, and below this stamp is a brass plaque inscribed "Angela’s 1835"
**(fig. 3-r)**.

*Bout de bureau*: The back is stamped B.V.R.B twice on the center of the
top rail **(fig. 3-s)**, and E.J.CUVELLIER on the right side of the rail
**(fig. 3-t)**. A torn piece of typed paper reading "M...xandrine de...."
remains attached to the back on the upper left side **(fig. 3-u)**.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-q, 3-r, 3-s, 3-t, 3-u" grid="2" >}}

## Commentary

The *serre-papiers* and the *bout de bureau* are by Bernard II van
Risenburgh.[^2] This form is rarely found among the master’s surviving
works. In an inventory of unfinished works drawn up in 1764 when van
Risenburgh sold his business to his son, only two *serre-papiers* are
included, one being described as with a clock.[^3] The total number of
works altogether is small because van Risenburgh worked specifically at
the order of *marchand merciers* and not for stock or private
commissions.[^4] One other example of the same model as the lower part,
or *bout de bureau*, is known to exist. It is in the State Hermitage
Museum and includes a *serre-papiers* bearing the stamp of Joseph
Baumhauer and the trade label of François-Charles Darnault.[^5] The
mounts on the lower section are of the same model as those found on the
museum’s example with the exception of the apron mount, those at the
upper forecorners and the moldings above and below. It is veneered with
wave cut marquetry on the front, and with large lozenges at the sides.

A *serre-papiers* of the same model but unstamped is in the collection
of the Calouste Gulbenkian Museum **(fig. 3-v)**.[^6] It is simply veneered
with satinwood and amaranth, and it lacks the elaborate gilt-bronze
mount at the center, above the openings intended for *cartons*. A *bout
de bureau* and its *serre-papiers* stamped BVRB passed through the Paris
art market in 1977.[^7] It was decorated with black and gold European
lacquer. The *serre-papiers*, which bore the same mounts as the
museum’s example, was lower in height and fitted with five drawers with
lacquered fronts. It lacked the central mount above. The *bout de
bureau* was of the same profile but lacked the lower projecting scrolls.
There were no framing mounts, but the moldings above and below were of
the same model. The legs and apron were not mounted with gilt bronze.
Similarly, a *bout de bureau* of the same size and profile to the
Museum’s example was offered for sale at auction in 2006.[^8] It was
stamped BVRB and bore a *serre-papiers* which contained a clock as part
of its upper structure. The movement was signed by Louis Mynüel. It,
too, lacked the scrolls at the forecorners and the *serre-papiers* was
of different form. The mount with a large boss or cabochon, found at the
center of the lower part of the frame on the front of the Museum’s
*bout de bureau* is here found on the apron.

{{< q-figure id="3-v" >}}

The elaborate framing mounts of the front and sides of the museum’s
*bout de bureau* were also used by van Risenburgh on a pair of corner
cupboards in the Museum’s collection (See Cat. no. 4 and the commentary
for that entry for other occurrences). The upper corners of these large
mounts are very similar in design to those areas of frames placed on the
front of a number of *commodes* stamped by van Risenburgh.[^9] While it
is extremely difficult to date works by this master, none of the mounts
on these *commodes* bear the stamp of the crowned C and were probably
made before 1745, when this stamp became obligatory. The mounts present
on the front and sides of the museum’s piece would appear to be a
refinement of this rather heavy design, with the addition of rococo
cabochons and meandering branches of flowers and leaves.

The mounts at the forecorners of the lower part of the assemblage are
more rarely found. They are seen on a *commode* passing through the
Paris market in 1922.[^10] The sale catalogue does not mention a stamp,
but the *commode*, set with ten drawers with lacquer fronts, was
certainly an early work by van Risenburgh. The clock with its bronze
painted figures is not physically attached to the painted top of the
*serre-papiers* below it.[^11] It almost certainly was not made by van
Risenburgh; the mounts, which are of a slightly different color of
gilding, are not of a model used by him. The European lacquer,
consisting in the main of flower heads, does not relate to the design of
the European lacquer on the sides of the *serre-papiers* or the main
body of the piece below, nor is it painted in the same technique. It is
possible that the clock was ordered by the *marchand mercier*
Thomas-Joachim Hébert, for whom van Risenburgh worked, from some other
cabinet maker and that he then placed it on the *serre-papiers* and
*bout de bureau* that had already been made at his request. The reverse
of the dial and one of the springs are dated 1746 and some mounts bear
crowned Cs.

It is possible that the *serre-papiers* and the *bout de bureau* were
lacquered by a member of the Martin family.[^12] Freestanding
*cartonniers*, as they are frequently termed, were almost always made
*en suite* with a *bureau plat*, which would have been similarly painted
or veneered and set with mounts carrying the same motifs. No such
*bureau plat* that would have formed a companion to the museum’s piece
is known to exist. Dominique Augarde has pointed out that such an
assemblage was made for the duc de Bourbon at the château de
Chantilly.[^13] His 1740 probate inventory describes the following in
his *petit cabinet*:

"Dans un petit cabinet en suitte. [...] Item un bureau à écrire de
verny ancien du Japon à pieds de biches ornés de bronze doré d’or moulu
et son dessus de velour [?] vert avec son serre papier aussi de verny
du Japon et une pendulle dessus faite par Jullien Le Roy à Paris dans sa
boëte à pagodes de verny, le tout orné de bronze doré d’or moulu,
prisez ensemble mil livres."[^14]

The high valuation would indicate that the *serre-papiers* described
here was an independent piece of furniture and not merely posed upon the
end of the *bureau plat* as was sometimes the custom. Of interest here
is the description of the clock case as "à pagodes de verny."

The Martin family of lacquerers were probably responsible for the
invention of the small painted bronze Chinese figures of the sort
popularly referred to as *magots* in the period. These are frequently
found on clocks and wall lights of a slightly earlier date and are
somewhat similar to those flanking the clock.[^15] Entries in a 1753
inventory of the belongings of the duchesse du Maine describe clocks and
wall lights decorated with "pagodes de verny de Martin," and one such
clock was listed in her *Cabinet de Chine* at the hôtel du Maine in
Paris.[^16] An illustration in the sale catalogue of 1922 when the
museum’s *cartonnier* was sold from the collection of the late Baroness
Burdett-Coutts shows that the clock was then topped by a fairly large
gilt-bronze palm tree, the small bronze children reaching up to it. It
is not known when the tree was lost. Similarly, the photograph shows
that there was then no gilt bronze mount on the apron. The mount now
present, which is not a van Risenburgh model, was probably added just
before the sale of the piece to the Museum in 1983.

On the back of the *bout de bureau* is a brass plaque inscribed
"Angela's 1835" (see fig. 3-u). This certainly refers to Angela
Burdett-Coutts who was twenty-one years old in that year. She was the
step-granddaughter of Harriot Beauclerk (formerly Coutts and née
Mellon), Duchess of Saint Albans and her favorite. The Duchess,
reputedly the daughter of an Irish strolling player, had at the age of
thirty-eight married the eighty-three-year-old banker Thomas Coutts in
1815. At his death seven years later she inherited his enormous wealth,
making her "the richest woman in the United Kingdom."[^17]
Burdett-Coutts took ownership of half the banking shares of her maternal
grandfather, a house on Stratton Street and its contents, Holly Lodge,
and Piccadilly House.[^18]

It is possible that the Duchess of Saint Albans received the
*cartonnier* not from Beauclerk, but from her first husband, Coutts.
Apparently he was sent by the George III on confidential missions
abroad, and spent some months in Paris. According to Edna Healey, French
aristocrats brought him their "treasures" for safekeeping, and Coutts
was a close friend of Philippe Egalité, duc d’Orléans.[^19] Angela
Burdett-Coutts, apart from amassing a large art collection, used her
wealth to fund numerous philanthropic schemes and charitable activities.
She was created Baroness by Queen Victoria in 1871. She married a third
time to William Bartlett in 1881, being his senior by thirty-nine years,
and died in 1906.

## Provenance:

‑ 1751

possibly Joseph Antoine Crozat de Thugny, French, 1699 -- 1751. Source:
Probate inventory of Joseph Antoine Crozat de Thugny, January 12, 1751,
item 397 (Paris, Archives nationales de France, Minutier central, XXX,
320).[^20]

‑ 1768

possibly Louis Jean Gaignat, French, 1697 ‑ 1768, upon his death, held
in trust by the estate, 1768. Source: Sealing of the estate of Louis
Jean Gaignat at his death, April 11, 1768 (Paris, Archives nationales de
France, Y 13961).[^21]

1768 -- 1769

possibly the heirs of Louis Jean Gaignat, French, 1697 ‑ 1768 [sold,
Paris, Pierre Rémy, February 14‑22, 1769, lot 179, to Paul Louis de
Mondran].[^22]

1769 ‑

possibly Paul Louis de Mondran, French, 1734 ‑ 1795

‑ 1835

possibly Harriot Beauclerk, duchess of St. Albans, English, 1777 ‑ 1837
(London, England), by gift to her step‑granddaughter on her twenty‑first
birthday, Angela Burdett‑Coutts, 1835. Source: Reginald Colby, "Eminent
Banker in the Strand: Thomas Coutts and His Family ̶ II." Country Life
139, no. 3617 (June 30, 1966).

1835 ‑ 1906

Baroness Angela Burdett‑Coutts, English, 1814 ‑ 1906 (London, England),
by inheritance to her husband, Hon. William Bartlett Burdett‑Coutts.
Source: “The Collection of... the late Barnoss Burdett‑Coutts... Now
sold by Order of the Executors of the Rt. Hon. W. Burdett‑Coutts.
M.P.,” Porcelain, Objects of Art and Decorative Furniture, Christie,
Manson & Woods, London, May 9, 1922.

1906 ‑ 1921

Hon. William Bartlett Burdett‑Coutts MP, American, 1851 ‑ 1921 (London,
England), upon his death, held in trust by the estate, 1921.

1921 ‑ 1922

Estate of Hon. William Bartlett Burdett‑Coutts MP, American, 1851 ‑ 1921
(London, England) [sold, Porcelain, Objects of Art and Decorative
Furniture, Christie, Manson & Woods, London, May 9, 1922, lot 144, for
4,200 guineas to H.J. Simmons.]

1922 ‑

H. J. Simmons

‑ 1940

Baronne Miriam Caroline Alexandrine de Rothschild, French, 1884 ‑ 1965
(Paris, France), looted by the Nazis, 1940.

1940 ‑

In the possession of the Nazis, restituted by the Allied Forces to
Baronne Miriam Caroline Alexandrine de Rothschild.

‑ 1965

Baronne Miriam Caroline Alexandrine de Rothschild, French, 1884 ‑ 1965
(Paris, France), by inheritance to her nephew and heir, Baron Edmond
Adolphe Maurice Jules Jacques de Rothschild, 1965.

1965 ‑ before 1968

Baron Edmond Adolphe Maurice Jules Jacques de Rothschild, French, 1926 ‑
1997 (Paris, France)

‑ 1968

José Ribeiro Espírito Santo Silva, Portuguese, 1895 ‑ 1968 (Lausanne,
Switzerland), by inheritance to his wife, Vera Lillian Morais Sarmento
Cohen Espírito Santo Silva, 1968.

1968 ‑ 1983

Vera Lillian Morais Sarmento Cohen Espírito Santo Silva, Portuguese,
1904 -- 1995 (Lausanne, Switzerland), sold through Didier Aaron & Cie to
the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1983.

## Bibliography:

Wilson, Gillian, Adrian Sassoon, and Charissa Bremer‑David.
“Acquisitions Made by the Department of Decorative Arts in 1983.” *The
J. Paul Getty Museum Journal* 12 (1984), pp. 193‑97, no. 6, fig. 16a‑e.

Sassoon, Adrian, and Gillian Wilson. *Decorative Arts: A Handbook of the
Collections of the J. Paul Getty Museum* (Malibu: J. Paul Getty Museum,
1986), p. 5, no. 10.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections.* 1st ed. (Malibu:
J. Paul Getty Museum, 1986), pp. 158‑59.

Augarde, Jean‑Dominique. “1749 Joseph Baumhauer: ébéniste privilégié du
roi.” *L’Estampille* 204 (June 1987), p. 25.

Pradère, Alexandre. *French Furniture Makers: The Art of the Ébéniste
from Louis XIV to the Revolution* (Malibu: J. Paul Getty Museum, 1989),
p. 196, fig. 188.

Pradère, Alexandre. *Les ébénistes français de Louis XIV à la
Révolution* (Paris: Chêne, 1989), p. 196, fig. 188.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections*. 3rd ed. (Malibu:
J. Paul Getty Museum, 1991), pp. 174‑75.

Bremer‑David, Charissa, et al. *Decorative Arts: An Illustrated Summary
Catalogue of the Collections of the J. Paul Getty Museum* (Malibu: J.
Paul Getty Museum, 1993), pp. 17‑18, no. 10.

Czarnocka, Anna. “*Vernis Martin*: The Lacquerwork of the Martin Family
in Eighteenth‑Century France.” *Studies in the Decorative Arts* 2, no.
1 (Fall 1994), pp. 67‑68, fig. 9.

Wilson, Gillian, et al. *European Clocks in the J. Paul Getty Museum*
(Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 1996), pp. 78‑85, no. 11.

*Masterpieces of the J. Paul Getty Museum: Decorative Arts* (Los
Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 1997), pp. 78‑79, no. 59.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections*. 4th ed. (Los
Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 1997), p. 205, ill.

Wolvesperges, Thibaut. *Le Meubles français en laque au XVIIIe siècle*
(Paris and Brussels: Les Éditions de l'Amateur and Éditions Racine,
2000), pp. 150, 152, fig. 74.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections*. 6th ed. (Los
Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2001), p. 205.

Wilson, Gillian, and Catherine Hess. *Summary Catalogue of European
Decorative Arts in the J. Paul Getty Museum* (Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 2001), p. 7, no. 10.

Wolvesperges, Thibaut. “A propos d’une pendule aux magots en vernis
Martin du musée du Louvre provenant de la collection Grog‑Carven.”
*Revue du Louvre: La Revue des Musées de france* 4 (October 2001), pp.
68, 70, figs. 2a‑c.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections*. 7th ed. (Los
Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2007), p. 232, ill.

*The J. Paul Getty Museum Handbook of the Collections*. 8th ed. (Los
Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2015), p. 276, ill.

Bonanni, Filippo. *Techniques of Chinese Lacquer: The Classic
Eighteenth-Century Treatise on Asian Varnish*. Translated by Flavia
Perugini. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum, 2009.

Bowett, Adam. *Woods in British Furniture-Making 1400-1900: An
Illustrated Historical Dictionary*. Wetherby, UK: Oblong Creative, 2012.

Czarnocka, Anna, Laura Lindgren, and Renata Stein. "Vernis Martin: The
Lacquerwork of the Martin Family in Eighteenth-Century France." *Studies
in the Decorative Arts* 2, no. 1 (1994): 56-74.

Day, Joan. "Brass and Zinc in Europe from the Middle Ages to the 19th
Century." In *2000 Years of Zinc and Brass*, edited by P. T. Craddock,
123--50. Occasional Papers (British Museum). London: British Museum
Publications Ltd., 1990.

Dossie, Robert. *The Handmaid to the Arts*. London: J. Nourse, 1758.

Fioravanti, Leonardo. *Del compendio dei secreti rationali libri
cinque*. Venezia: Andrea Ravenoldo, 1564.

*Genuine Receipt for Making the Famous Vernis Martin or, as It Is Called
by the English, Martin's Copal Varnish*. Paris [sic? London?], 1773.
http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/ECCO?c=1&stp=Author&ste=11&af=BN&ae=T122504&tiPG=1&dd=0&dc=flc&docNum=CW105938106&vrsn=1.0&srchtp=a&d4=0.33&n=10&SU=0LRL+OR+0LRI&locID=gri_wbis.

Heginbotham, Arlen. "Bronzes Dorés: A Technical Approach to Examination
and Authentication of French Gilt Bronze." In *French Bronze Sculpture:
Materials and Techniques 16th -18th Century*, edited by David Bourgarit,
Jane Bassett, Francesca Bewer, Geneviéve Bresc-Bautier, Philippe
Malgouyres, and Guilhem Scharf, 150--65. London: Archetype, 2013.

Huth, Hans. *Lacquer of the West: The History of a Craft and an
Industry, 1550-1950*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971.

Koller, Johann, and Ursula Baumer. "An Investigation of the 'Lacquers of
the West'. A Methological Survey." In *Japanische Und Europaische
Lackarbeiten = Japanese and European Lacquerware: Adoption, Adaptation,
Conservation*, edited by Michael Kuhlenthal, 339--48. Munich:
Bayerisches Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, 2000.

Koller, Johann, Ursula Baumer, Dietger Grosser, and Katharina Walch.
"Turpentine, Larch Turpentine, and Venetian Turpentine." In *Lacke des
Barock und Rokoko = Baroque and Rococo Lacquers*, edited by Katharine
Walch and Johann Koller, 359--78. Munich: Bayerisches Landesamt für
Denkmalpflege, 1997.

Koller, Johann, Emilia Schmid, and Ursula Baumer. "Baroque and Rococo
Transparent Varnishes on Wood Surfaces: I. A Scientific Study." In
*Lacke Des Barock Und Rokoko = Baroque and Rococo Lacquers*, edited by
Katharine Walch and Johann Koller, 160--97. Munich: Bayerisches
Landesamt fur Denkmalpflege, 1997.

Langenheim, Jean H. *Plant Resins: Chemistry, Evolution, Ecology, and
Ethnobotany*. Portland: Timber Press, 2003.

Le Hô, Anne-Solenn, Céline Daher, Ludovic Bellot-Gurlet, Yannick
Vandenberghe, Jean Bleton, Myrtho Bonnin, Léa Drieu, et al. "French
Lacquers of the 18th Century and Vernis Martin." In *ICOM-CC 17th
Triennial Conference Preprints, Melbourne, 15-19 September 2014*, 8.
Paris: International Council of Museums, 2014.

Pitthard, Václav, Richard Stone, Sabine Stanek, Martina Griesser,
Claudia-Kryza-Gersch, and Helene Hanzer. "Organic Patinas on Renaissance
and Baroque Bronzes--Interpretation of Compositions of the Original
Patination by Using a Set of Simulated Varnished Bronze Coupons."
*Journal of Cultural Heritage* 12, no. 1 (March 1, 2011): 44--53.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2010.09.002.

Richardson, John Adkins, Gillian Wilson, and Charissa Bremer-David.
"European Clocks in the J. Paul Getty Museum." *Journal of Aesthetic
Education* 32, no. 4 (1998): 112. https://doi.org/10.2307/3333392.

Rowell, Christopher, and Wolf Burchard. "François Benois, Martin-Eloi
Lignereux and Lord Whitworth: Leasing, Furnishing and Dismantling the
British Embassy in Paris during the Peace of Amiens, 1802-03."
*Furniture History* 52 (2016): 181--213.

Salmon, William, Pierre-Jean Fabre, A. and J. Churchill, and John
Nicholson. *Polygraphice, or, The Arts of Drawing, Engraving, Etching,
Limning, Painting, Vernishing, Japaning, Gilding, &c. : In Two Volumes*.
8^th^ ed. London: A. and J. Churchill and J. Nicholson, 1701.

Stalker, John, and George Parker. *A Treatise of Japaning and
Varnishing : Being a Compleat Discovery of Those Arts, with the Best Way
of Making All Sorts of Varnish for Japan, Wood, Prints, or Pictures...*.
Oxford: Stalker and Parker, 1688.

Stone, Richard E. "Organic Patinas on Small Bronzes of the Italian
Renaissance." *Metropolitan Museum Journal* 45 (January 2010): 107--24.
https://doi.org/10.1086/met.45.41558056.

Walch, Katharina. "Baroque and Rococo Transparent Gloss Lacquers: I. The
Replication of White Lacquers on the Basis of Historic Sources and
Scientific Examination." In *Lacke Des Barock Und Rokoko = Baroque and
Rococo Lacquers*, edited by Katharine Walch and Johann Koller, 21--52.
Munich: Bayerisches Landesamt fur Denkmalpflege, 1997.

Watin, Jean-Felix. *L'art Du Peintre, Doreur, Vernisseur : Ouvrage Utile
Aux Artistes & Aux Amateurs Qui Veulent Entreprendre de Peindre Dorer &
Vernir Toutes Sortes de Sujets En Bгatimens, Meubles, Bijoux, Equipages,
& C*. Second rev. ed., Paris: Grangé, 1773.
<http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k841821>.

Watson, R. *Chemical Essays*. Vol. 4. Cambridge: J. Archdeacon, 1786.

Webb, Marianne. *Lacquer Technology and Conservation: A Comprehensive
Guide to the Technology and Conservation of Both Asian and European
Lacquer*. Butterworth-Heinemann Series in Conservation and Museology.
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000.

## Technical Description

The carcass of the clock is made primarily of oak, which has been
veneered both inside and outside with alder. The alder veneer serves to
provide a smooth and fine grained substrate for the European lacquer
decoration. It is made of ten main sections of wood with the grain
running from front to back, laminated together with simple butt joins
and sawn to shape **(fig. 3-w)**. The case front and case back panels are
glued to the sides and set into a dado cut at the forward and rear edges
of the sides. The case bottom is set in dados cut in the front and sides
of the carcass. The case back, the rear door and the case bottom of the
clock are made of mahogany. The use of mahogany for an unseen structural
element would be quite unusual in Parisian work of the mid 18^th^
century and so may represent a later restoration and replacement. There
has been significant insect damage to the rest of the clock carcass,
particularly near the bottom, which may explain the replacement. The use
of mahogany for unseen structural elements was, in contrast, not
uncommon in the United Kingdom particularly in the first half of the
19^th^ century when mahogany was abundant and relatively inexpensive.
[^23] For example, a copy of a Boulle clock, now at Knole house, was
made in England and signed and dated by Wertheimer, 1841[^24]. This
clock uses mahogany exclusively as secondary wood. As this clock has an
English provenence from sometime before 1835 until sometime after 1922,
it seems likely that the restoration dates to this period. The glass
pane below the clock face appears to be a later addition. It is possible
that this opening was originally covered with a textile as this would
allow the sound of the clocks striking mechanism to be heard more
clearly. Unfortunately, no evidence of the original covering material
could be found without extensive intervention. The mechanism of the
clock has been described at length in {{Richardson, 1998}}.[^25]

{{< q-figure id="3-w" >}}

The carcass of the *serre-papiers* is constructed primarily of solid
poplar, sawn and filed to form. The uses of poplar as a solid
construction wood is quite uncommon in Parisian *ebenisterie*, In this
case, however, the choice to use poplar saved the craftsmen considerable
time and effort. As has been noted above, an even and fine grained wood
such as alder or poplar, provides a smooth surface for elements that are
to be lacquered. Oak, in contrast, has a coarse surface, with very large
pores and irregular bands of dense and non-absorbent rays, making the
preparation of a perfectly smooth and adherent lacquered surface more
difficult. In most cases, as with the clock above, Parisian *ebenistes*
chose to fabricate their structures in oak and then veneer the surfaces
to be lacquered with a smooth-grained and inexpensive domestic wood. In
the case of this *serre-papiers*, it would appear that the difficult
task of veneering the very strongly curved inside and outside surfaces
(and perhaps especially the compound curvature of the upper frieze),
seemed to be more trouble than it was worth. By building in solid
poplar, all the surfaces of the *serre-papiers* could be lacquered
directly without further preparation. A distinct disadvantage of
building in solid poplar is that it is substantially less resistant to
insect attack that oak heartwood. The results can be seen when the case
is radiographed **(fig. 3-x)**.

{{< q-figure id="3-x" >}}

The curved side panels are made of two vertical boards, butt joined, and
connected with dovetails to the case bottom and to the primary
transverse board at the top, which forms the upper surface of the top
*carton* compartments **(fig. 3-y)**. This transverse member is made of a
single massive poplar plank and X-ray images show that it contains the
pith of the tree, a cut that is generally regarded as unstable and prone
to splitting **(fig. 3-z)**. The upper section of the *serre-papiers* is
attached to the main box-like structure with simple butt joins. It
consists of two side rails, back and front boards, and the top, which
are assembled with no joinery other than glue. The case back is made of
two thin poplar boards, glued into a rabbet cut into the sides, top and
bottom of the main compartment.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-y, 3-z" grid="2" >}}

In contrast to the *serre-papiers*, the construction of the lower case,
or *bout de bureau*, is entirely of oak, veneered with alder. BVRB also
chose alder veneer for the areas to receive European lacquer on the
museum's commode 65.DA.4 (Cat. no. 5). The oak used for the construction of
the *bout de bureau* is of notably high quality, almost entirely
quarter-sawn and nearly free of knots. The structure is based on four
posts of the corners which run from the floor to just below the case
top. The case back is made as a two-panel frame-and-panel construction.
The cross-rails are attached to the posts at top and bottom with
unpinned mortise-and-tenon joints; the vertical stile running between
the top and bottom rails is similarly joined. The two panels are each
composed of three boards of quarter-sawn oak, with a simple bevel at the
edges which is placed on the rear face of the panels. The front of the
case is also made as a frame-and-panel construction. However, in this
case the panels are held in place with tongue-and-groove joints. In
addition, the panels of the front are exceptionally thick, allowing them
to be planed and scraped into an oxbow contour at the front. The entire
front of the case is subsequently veneered with alder, applied on a
bias, presumably to stabilize the construction and prevent splitting of
the underlying glue joints.

A central partition divides the inner case in half. The partition is
made of five boards of quarter-sawn oak fixed at front and back into
dadoes cut in the medial styles of the case front and case back. The
case front and case back assemblies are attached to one another with
rails at top and bottom, which are attached with dovetails exposed at
the top of the post, and sliding dovetail joints front and back at the
bottom.

The case top is made as an independent frame-and-panel construction,
with two panels, each composed of two boards of quarter-sawn oak with
the grain running from side to side. The joinery for the attachment at
the top is not clearly discernable, even in X-radiography, but it would
appear to rely on glued tongue-and-groove joints. The front corner
scrolls are each made of separate individual pieces of wood glued and
screwed to the main case. The small blocks of wood below the scrolls,
which support the gilt bronze moldings, are glued to the tops of the
foot blocks below, and are attached with a loose tenon (visible in
x-radiography) to the scrolls above **(fig. 3-aa)**.

{{< q-figure id="3-aa" >}}

The top of the lower case was also veneered with alder on a bias.
However, a C-shaped patch of veneer appears to have been put into the
top which goes directly underneath the sides and back of the
*serre-papiers* . There has been extensive restoration and repainting
along this veneer patch, visible most distinctly under ultraviolet
illumination, though the reason for it is not entirely clear (Fig.
3-ab).

The apron of the lower case is constructed of three to four additional
narrow boards of oak laminated to the underside of the main case rails.
The doors are each made of three boards of quarter-sawn oak laminated
together with breadboard ends, also of oak, attached with
tongue-and-groove joints.

The decorative surfaces of the cartonnier, including those on the *bout
de bureau*, the *serre-papiers,* the clock, and the figures, are carried
out entirely in European lacquer, without the incorporation of any Asian
panels. The *bout de bureau* and the *serre-papiers* appear to be
lacquered with the same system, applied in five primary layers excluding
those of the decoration. Two layers of a yellow iron-based clay ground,
bound in a simple varnish of pine resin and drying oil, were applied to
the alder or poplar substrate. These ground layers closely resemble the
yellow-beige clay-based grounds used on Japanese lacquer as opposed to
the traditionally white gesso or pigmented varnish layers recommended in
European period treatises[^26] . The foundation layers were then coated
with two black layers of oil-resin varnish pigmented with bone black
**(fig. 3-ac; Fig. 3-ad)**. Based on analysis by Pyrolysis Gas
Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (Py/GC-MS), the varnish medium of these
layers is similar in composition to that of the underlying foundation
layers, however, it appears to have a polycommunic diterpenoid resin
component in addition to drying oil and pine resin. This additional
resin, likely soft copal, may have been added to give increased hardness
and gloss in order to more closely imitate Asian lacquer. Filippo
Bonanni, writing in the 1730s, described his own experiments in creating
an amber-colored varnish of this type, "similar to the Chinese one",
that was composed of Greek pitch (colophony) and linseed oil to which he
added copal. [^27] On the *serre-papiers* and *bout de bureau*, the
pigmented varnish layers were then coated with an additional transparent
varnish that contained linseed oil and pine resin.[^28] This system,
which bears much resemblance to that used on the BVRB Commode (CAT5),
emulates quite closely the layer structure of seventeenth-century
Japanese export lacquer, substituting locally available materials for
those used in Asia. This suggests that the work was carried out by a
craftsman or craftsmen who had carefully studied examples of the
Japanese lacquer they were attempting to imitate, and who were striving
to reproduce not just the appearance, but the entire manufacturing
process, to the best of their ability.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-ac, 3-ad" grid="2" >}}

The raised decoration above the lacquer was created with a calcium
carbonate-containing ground upon which vermillion and metallic powders
were applied. The decoration utilizes a wide range of metallic powders
to impart several different hues to the final composition **(fig. 3-ae)**.
As identified with SEM-EDX, the broad surfaces of the foliate
decoration, particularly the large leaf forms, appear to have been
created with a low-zinc brass likely originally created from brass leaf.
Three additional distinct metallic powders, with an average particle
size of ten to twenty microns, were used to add fine outlines and
details in moderate-zinc brass, high-zinc brass, and gold **(fig. 3-af)**.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-ae, 3-af" grid="2" >}}

The interior of the compartments in the *serre-papiers* appear to have
been originally executed in red European lacquer. Red pigment from this
layer is visible in small areas where the overlying black paint is
flaking or damaged. This red color would not have been visible when the
original *cartons* were in place, but when they were removed to access
their contents, the red would have evoked the brightly colored interiors
of many 17^th^ century Japanese export lacquer cabinets (as do the
corner cabinets by Dubois in this volume which retain their red
interiors; CAT 12). At some time before 1922, presumably when the
original *cartons* were separated from this *serre-papiers*, the
interior was painted over in black.

On the clock, the European lacquer was also applied to a substrate
veneered with alder; however, the stratigraphy is entirely different
from that observed on the *serre-papiers* and the *bout de bureau.*
Here, the lowest layer, directly on the wood, is a heavy white gesso
ground, based on calcium carbonate and likely bound with glue. The use
of a gesso ground is typically unnecessary on fine-grained veneers.
Period European treatises more frequently recommend that a black
pigmented layer be applied directly to the veneered support, although a
wide range of techniques have been observed on period objects in
practice.[^29] Above the gesso layer, two black pigmented layers were
applied. The first consists of finely divided lamp black, bound in
shellac. Over the first black layer lies a second, more transparent
layer of pigmented varnish, colored with more expensive bone or ivory
black pigment. The addition of this layer was likely designed to
increase the apparent depth and gloss of the surface, in order to better
imitate Asian lacquer.

The quality of the lacquer on the clock and its decoration are superb;
however, the material composition is somewhat surprising for the period.
The use of pure shellac spirit varnish was certainly known at the time;
both Stalker and Parker and Bonanni both provide recipes for the
creation of a 'black Japan' with seedlac, spirits of wine, and black
pigment. Stalker and Parker specify a preference for lamp black with a
reduced amount of pigment in the upper layer similar to what is observed
in the cross-section from the clock **(fig. 3-ag; Fig. 3-ah)**. While a
shellac varnish could very well have been used for a black European
lacquer surface in the mid-eighteenth-century, Bonanni notes after the
1667 publication of Father Athanasius Kircher's shellac varnish, "all
over European people tried to improve the quality of this varnish
through the addition of gums, solutions, and bitumen." [^30] While
shellac was once believed to be the dominant resin used in European
lacquer, modern analysis frequently detects more complicated resin
mixtures[^31] as seen in the *bout de bureau* and *serre-papiers*. The
decoration is of superb quality and utilizes metallic powers in brass,
gold, and silver to create a great variety of hues in a range of
decorative techniques. Given the excellent condition of the surface, it
should be considered whether the clock has been renewed or restored.
Archival photographs show that the clock, with its current decoration,
has accompanied the cartonnier since at least 1922.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-ag, 3-ah" grid="2" >}}

The figures that decorate the top of clock appear to retain their
original European lacquer, consisting of eight varnish layers. This
lacquer is entirely different from that on the rest of the clock. First,
an oil-resin under-varnish or sealer was applied to the bronze
substrate, in at least two separate applications. Based on organic
analysis by py-GC/MS, the composition of these layers is very similar to
the varnish used in the ground and transparent layers on the *bout de
bureau* and the *serre-papiers*; it is also primarily composed of drying
oil and pine resin*.* These preparatory layers are followed by two
varnish layers of similar composition, pigmented with bone black. The
black layers are coated with two additional transparent layers of
similar composition to the under-varnish, followed by decoration in
vermillion and gold and silver powders. A trace amount of shellac was
also detected in these decoration layer that may relate to contamination
from a restoration varnish or its intentional use as a size for the
metallic decoration **(fig. 3-ai; Fig. 3-aj)**.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-ai, 3-aj" grid="2" >}}

While the pagodes as well as the *bout de bureau* and the
*serre-papiers* could have been lacquered by the Martin brothers, it is
not possible to confirm this attribution based current methods of
chemical analysis.[^32] The Martin brothers are known to have used the
materials seen in these samples, including pine resin, linseed oil, and
copal,[^33] but these components were in widespread use at the time and
are in no way indicative of a unique recipe. In fact, lacquers based on
pine resin and linseed oil, the two dominant materials detected in the
samples from the cartonnier and pagodes, are published in Italian
treatises as early as 1562[^34].

The Martin recipe published by Jean-Félix Watin[^35] as *vernis blanc au
copal* specifies the use of melted copal, linseed oil, and Venice
turpentine. Another English account from 1773, purporting to reveal the
recipe for *Vernis* Martin, calls for melted copal and amber, combined
with colophony and linseed oil[^36]. At the time Watin was writing,
Venice turpentine, named for the city through which it was traded,
referred to the resin of the larch tree, *Larix decidua*
(Pinaceae).[^37] Larch turpentine has been confirmed in samples from
other objects in the collection, but does not appear in the analysis of
the cartonnier. This finding is complicated by the fact that larch resin
and copal are notoriously difficult to detect analytically if they have
been strongly heated[^38] and both recipes referred to here call for the
resins to be melted and stirred with the oil over high heat. The resin
component that was detected here is the less expensive
domestically-harvested turpentine, such as those collected from a range
of *Pinaceae* species*.*[^39] While the failure to detect *Larix* resin
or copal here does not rule out the possibility of a Martin attribution,
it does not support such a conclusion.

The gilt bronze mounts on all three sections of the cartonnier appear to
be original and to retain old mercury gilding. The crowned C marks on
the mounts of the clock are crisply and deeply struck. It is interesting
to note that the bronze pagoda figures are also struck with crowned C
marks on the bottoms of their feet. The figures were clearly struck
before they were turned over to the lacquerer's studio, as the lacquer
fills and partly obscures the marks **(fig. 3-ak and Fig. 3-al)**.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-ak, 3-al" grid="2" >}}

Twenty four mounts, eight different models from each section, were
removed for compositional analysis by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy
(XRF). In addition, three measurements were made of the brazing alloy
used to join separately cast elements. The mounts, with one exception,
were found to have compositions common to 18^th^ century Parisian
mounts, with zinc levels between 18 and 24%, tin between 0.45 and 1. 5%,
and lead between 0.8 and 2.0%. Levels of impurities in the metal, such
as iron, arsenic, silver, nickel and antimony, were also determined to
be at usual levels for mounts of the period. The exceptional mount was,
unsurprisingly, the center mount on the front of the base of the *bout
de bureau* which does not appear in the 1922 catalog image at the time
of the sale from the Burdett-Coutts collection **(fig. 3-am)**. The brass
alloy of this mount contains significantly lower levels of impurities
than 18^th^ century examples, though it is not as pure as most mounts
produced in the second half of the 20^th^ century or the early 21^st^
century. This leads to the conclusion that the mount was probably
fabricated between the late 19^th^ century and the middle of the 20^th^
century, though it could have been added to the *bout de bureau* at any
time after 1922. This mount is also very atypical of 18^th^ century
Parisian work in that the reverse side bears clear marks of the gouges
used to hollow out the back side of the original wooden master model
**(fig. 3-an)**. The only other examples in this catalog of mounts with
clear gouge marks are the mounts on the Dubois corner cabinet (CAT11)
that were probably replaced in central Europe during the mid 19^th^
century.

{{< q-figure-group id="3-am, 3-an" grid="2" >}}

An analysis of the mount compositions by section (clock,
*serre-papiers*, and *bout de bureau*) might have been expected to show
that the clock mounts, by and unknown maker, were somehow different from
those on the lower sections made by BVRB. In fact, the mounts of the
clock and the *serre-papiers* are quite similar, while the mounts of the
*bout de bureau* seem to constitute a distinguishable group with tin
levels notably lower than those in the other sections. This suggests
that the mounts of the *bout de bureau* and *serre-papiers* were not
cast from the same batch of molten metal, but perhaps more importantly,
it highlights the fact that a certain amount of uncontrolled variability
in casting alloy is to be expected even from within a single workshop
and it is not likely that differences between the production of
different contemporaneous foundries will be able to be drawn based on
the study of alloys.

The central scroll mount on the front of the *serre-papiers* is not
present on Gulbenkian or the Paris Market versions of this model,
mentioned in the Commentary above. This mount is also unusual because it
rather inexplicably obscures a passage of high quality lacquer
decoration. The alloy of the mount, however matches those of the other
mounts on the *serre-papiers*, offering no evidence that the mount is a
later addition. Likewise, the quality of the chasing on this mount
corresponds well with the other mounts.

{{< q-figure id="3-ao" >}}

As mentioned in the Description above, the framing mounts on the front
of the *bout de bureau* are of the same model as those used by BVRB on
his pair of corner cabinets in the Museum's collection (CAT 4), though
they have been enlarged to fit the broad dimension of the *bout de
bureau*. An examination of the backs of the top and bottom mounts shows
clearly where sections of molding have been brazed into the middle of
the mounts in order to lengthen them **(fig. 3-ao)**. The brass brazing
metal used to join these and other elements is noteworthy for its highly
elevated zinc levels, ranging between 33% and 37%. At these levels, the
brass is almost certainly so-called spelter brass, made by adding pure
zinc metal rather than by the traditional cementation process using zinc
ores [^40]. Zinc metal was still something of a rarity in Europe in the
middle of the 18^th^ century and would likely have come from either
England or China. Spelter brass would have been more expensive than
conventional cementation brass and its use was restricted to higher
quality brass products like jewelry and scientific instruments[^41].
Obviously, brazing uses a very small amount of metal and so the
additional cost must have been insignificant in comparison the benefits
of the significantly lower melting point of the alloy which made it
easier and safer to use. This type of spelter brass brazing metal is
rarely, if ever, found on gilded bronzes of the early 18^th^ century or
before.

AH, JC, MS

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}
## Notes
{{< /q-class >}}

[^1]: For more information on the clock, and for images of the marks, see {{Wilson et al. 1996}}, 78-85, no. 11. (<http://www.getty.edu/publications/virtuallibrary/0892362545.html>)

[^2]: In the eighteenth century this form of furniture was sometimes referred to as a *bout de bureau* with its *serre-papiers*. On the other hand, the word *cartonnier* was frequently used to denote not only the *serre-papiers* but also the complete object. For clarity the former terminology is used in this entry.

[^3]: Paris, Archives nationales de France, Minutier central, XXVIII, 389, October 18, 1764, sale of the shop's assets and its sublease, Bernard Vanrisamburgh and his wife to their son. The reference of this inventory was published by Daniel Alcouffe in {{*Louis XV...* 1974}}, 323-324, and partially transcribed in {{Pradère 1989}}, 199. According to the terminology alluded to in the previous footnote, it is possible that "*serre-papiers*" could describe a form that included a *bout de bureau*.

[^4]: {{Pradère 1989}}, 184-185.

[^5]: See {{Birioukova 1974}}, 189, and no. 93. The *serre-papiers* is stamped Joseph for Joseph Baumhauer and it bears the trade label of Darnault. The *bout de bureau* is stamped BVRB for Bernard II van Risenburgh. It was acquired by the State Hermitage Museum in 1933 from the École Steiglitz (Inv.no. MB 434). According to correspondence between the author and Tamara Rappe in December of 1991, a letter of 1745 exists from Count Vorontsov to his Paris agent saying that Catherine II had taken his *serre-papiers* and that he needed to order another, indicating that this example, which originally stood in Catherine’s palace at Oranienbaum, is the one made for Vorontsov. However, the presence of crowned Cs on its mounts indicates that the piece cannot have been made earlier than 1745. It is possible that it was sent to Saint Petersburg as soon as it was finished and immediately seized by Catherine, prompting the letter of this date. After undertaking further research Rappe believes that the Hermitage *serre-papiers* was neither the one taken from Vorontsov by Catherine the Great nor the replacement ordered by Vorontsov, but rather one delivered to the cabinet doré of the Palais Chinois at Oranienbaum in August 1765 by the merchant François Rembert. See {{Rappe 1993}}, especially 206, fig. 1; See also, {{*Un siècle d'élégance française* 2016}}*,* 52, no. 14.

[^6]: {{Coutinho 1999}}, 161, no. 13, inv. no. 584 (H. 57 x W. 82 x D. 31 cm). Purchased from B. Fabre et Fils of Paris in 1928.

[^7]: *Objets d'art et de très bel ameublement principalement du XVIIIe siècle,* sale catalog, Ader Picard Tajan Paris, March 22, 1977, lot 114 (H. 135.5 x W. 94 x D. 40 cm).

[^8]: *A Private European Residence: French & Neoclassical Furniture, Paintings & Works on Paper,* sale catalog, Sotheby's London, March 3, 2006, lot 336.

[^9]: For a *commode* of this form, veneered with Coromandel lacquer in the Sheafer Collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (inv. no. 1974.356.189), see {{Wolvesperges 2000}}, 186-187, fig. 84, where the piece is dated 1740-1745. A similarly mounted *commode* set with end cut floral marquetry was sold at Sotheby's London on February 24, 1956, and is illustrated in {{Frégnac and Meuvret 1965}}, 78, no. 2. Another, with shaped panels of marquetry and stamped with the mark of the château de Bellevue, was sold by Couturier Nicolay in Paris at Drouot, November 18-19, 1981, no. 87. It was exhibited by the Galerie Perrin at the exhibition *De Versailles à Paris: le destin des collections royales* held at the mairie du Ve arrondissement (exhibition catalogue of the same title, {{Charles 1989}}, 242, no. 75). Other *commodes* of this form, similarly mounted, have appeared at auction in New York, London, and Paris on numerous occasions in the second half of the twentieth century and in the first decade of the twenty-first.

[^10]: *Tableaux anciens, aquarelles, dessins, gouaches, pastels,
    anciens et modernes, gravures,* sale catalog, Galerie Georges Petit
    Paris, May 8, 1922, lot 260, from the collection of the marquise de
    Ganay. Also see {{Alcouffe 1995}}, 133, fig. 46e.

[^11]: See note 1 above.

[^12]: For information on the Martin family of lacquerers see {{Wolvesperges 2000}}, 96-121, and {{Forray-Carlier and Kopplin 2014}}.

[^13]: Correspondence with the author, August 16, 1994. In the files of the Sculpture and Decorative Arts Department, J. Paul Getty Museum.

[^14]: Paris, Archives nationales de France, Minutier central, XCII, 504, February 17, 1740, probate inventory of Louis Henri de Bourbon, prince of Condé. I thank Dominique Augarde for providing this information in our correspondence in the above footnote.

[^15]: On the Martin brothers' creation of such figures, see {{Wolvesperges 2001}}. See also {{Kisluk-Grosheide 2002}}.

[^16]: {{Czarnocka, Lindgren, and Stein 1994}}, especially 67, note 51. See also {{Lewallen 2009-2010}}. For a similar object, see also a pair of bronze and silver figures holding baskets of sugarcane by Étienne Simon Martin and Guillaume Martin in the Museum's collection (88.DH.127).

[^17]: In 1827 Harriet Mellon married William Beauclerk, 9th Duke of St. Albans.

[^18]: For further information on the Coutts family see {{Anonymous 1819}}, 1-16; {{Colby 1966a}}; and by the same author, {{Colby 1966b}}. Also *Important Silver and Objects of Vertu,* sale catalog, Christies' New York, April 15, 1997, lot 280 (in the text of the sale catalog).

[^19]: {{Healey 1978}}, 24.

[^20]: "397. Item un serrepapier de bois de vernis de la Chine en deux corps garnis d'ornement de cuivre doré d'or moulu prisé deux cent libres cy."

[^21]: "Nous avons apposés nos scellés et cachets de nos armes sur les bouts et extrémités de trois bandes de papiers appliquées sur les trois tiroirs et sur le deffus de bureau dudit Sr. Gaignat etant dans ledi Cabinet lesquels tiroirs nous avons fermé avec la clef restée en nos mains."

[^22]: "Un Bureau de Cabinet et fon ferre-papier d'ancien laque, fon noir à payfages & oifeaux, en or de relief encadrés d'ornements de bronze doré. Le fupport du ferre-papier & les frifes du Bureau font vernis, fond noir, par Martin: les autres bronzes très très riches & très bien cifelés. Ce bureau a 5 pieds et demi de long, fans comprendre le ferre-papier." 1,500 livres to "De Mondran."

[^23]: {{Bowett 2012}}, 119--47.

[^24]: The clock is published in Rowell and Burchard, "François Benois, Martin-Eloi Lignereux and Lord Whitworth."

[^25]: {{Richardson, Wilson, and Bremer-David, 1998}}.

[^26]: {{Bonanni 2009}}, 59; {{Salmon et al. 1701}}, 889--91.

[^27]: {{Bonanni 2009}}, 47.

[^28]: Traces of shellac was also noted in the uppermost layer likely relating to later restoration coatings.

[^29]: {{Le Hô et al. 2014}}.

[^30]: {{Dossie 1758}}, 419; {{Stalker and Parker 1688}}, 19--20; {{Bonanni 2009}}, 10--11.

[^31]: {{Huth 1971}}, 24; {{Koller et al. 1997}}; {{Koller, Schmid, and Baumer 1997}}; {{Webb 2000}}, 121--22; {{Walch 1997}}; {{Koller and Baumer 2000}}.

[^32]: {{Le Hô et al. 2014}}; {{Czarnocka, Lindgren, and Stein 1994}}.

[^33]: These materials were all noted in the after-death inventories noted by {{Le Hô et al. 2014}}.

[^34]: {{Fioravanti 1564}}.

[^35]: {{Watin 1773}}, 238.

[^36]: {{*Genuine Receipt* 1773}}.

[^37]: {{Langenheim 2003}}.

[^38]: {{Pitthard et al. 2011.}}

[^39]: {{Koller et al. 1997}}.

[^40]: {{Heginbotham 2013}}.

[^41]: {{Watson, 1786}}.
